Kto trainer (#1181)
huggingface/trl: docs/source/kto_trainer.mdx

# KTO Trainer

TRL supports the Kahneman-Tversky optimization (KTO) Trainer for training language models from unpaired preference data, as described in the [report](https://github.com/ContextualAI/HALOs/blob/main/assets/report.pdf) by Kawin Ethayarajh, Winnie Xu, Dan Jurafsky, and Douwe Kiela.

## Expected dataset format

> The KTO trainer expects a very specific format for the dataset as it does not require pairwise preferences. Since the model will be trained to directly optimize un-paired datasets of preferred and un-preferred generations, given some prompts, we expect a dataset with the following columns:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The KTO trainer expects a very specific format for the dataset as it does not require pairwise preferences. Since the model will be trained to directly optimize examples that consist of a prompt, model completion, and a label to indicate whether the completion is "good" or "bad", we expect a dataset with the following columns:
```

- `prompt`

> - `generation`

Reviewer: nit: i suggest we follow the terminology that is widely used in other datasets

```suggestion
- `completion`
```

> - `chosen`

Reviewer: would `label` be a better choice here since in principle we may have a scalar score?
```suggestion
- `label`
```

for example:

```
kto_dataset_dict = {
    "prompt": [
        "Hey, hello",
        "How are you",
        "What is your name?",
        "What is your name?",
        "Which is the best programming language?",
        "Which is the best programming language?",
        "Which is the best programming language?",
    ],
    "completion": [
        "hi nice to meet you",
        "leave me alone",
        "I don't have a name",
        "My name is Mary",
        "Python",
        "C++",
        "Java",
    ],
    "label": [
        True,
        False,
        False,
        True,
        True,
        False,
        False,
    ],
}
```

> where the `prompt` contains the context inputs, `completion` contains the corresponding responses and `label` contains the corresponding flag that indicates if the generated completion is preferred or unprepared. As can be seen a prompt can have multiple responses and this is reflected in the entries being repeated in the dictionary's value arrays.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where the `prompt` contains the context inputs, `completion` contains the corresponding responses and `label` contains the corresponding flag that indicates if the generated completion is desired or undesired. As can be seen a prompt can have multiple responses and this is reflected in the entries being repeated in the dictionary's value arrays.
```
